# Empowering Junior Developers

## Abstract

Every company wants to hire senior developers, but those are hard to find. They
hire juniors, but then we, as an industry, don’t know how to train them. We end
up giving them trivial work while the senior developers burn out with the
critical tasks. That’s unsustainable!

If you work with junior developers and you want to level them up, this talk
will show you some dynamics you can apply to your daily routine to improve
their skills. We will study some practical examples of how you can shape your
team to become more connected, balanced and productive in the long run.

## Details

Onboarding junior developers and helping them grow to become productive and
independent is a hard problem, especially when it needs to be solved on a
larger scale. It looks like a lot of companies are exclusively looking for
senior developers but the reality is that those are very limited. Helping
junior developers grow into senior developers is a scalable and
self-sustainable strategy that increases the intrinsic value of an
organization, reduces the complexity of growing teams and also benefits the
whole ecosystem of developers.

This talk describes some common dynamics that many teams have and ways you can
improve them to be more focused on your teammates' growth:

### Know your peers

Good communication is a cornerstone of many aspects of a team but is
particularly necessary to foster growth. Members of a team need to feel safe to
be themselves, make mistakes and learn from them. This is not only applicable
to a single team, but it's also applicable to larger crowds like the open
source community. Unless a person feels like they can express their thoughts
openly, they probably won't be maximizing their growth.

The first step towards empowering those around you is to enable a good
connection with them. Listen carefully to their desires and frustrations and
make sure you show them yours. Build trust so when it’s time to debate about
technical issues the conversations can stay constructive. Know your peers so
you can keep them motivated.

### Fail small, succeed big

Learning from one's mistakes is a powerful weapon, but ruining a project can be
demoralizing. On the other hand, being told how to write every single line of
code might not be challenging and could bore you. There's a sweet spot in the
middle of those two extremes and that is: experienced developers can prevent
junior developers from going down certain paths leading to disaster while
allowing them to own their code and occasionally fail. This might be hard for
some seasoned developers, which is why it needs to be practiced.

In general, remember that delegating and trusting is very empowering. When a
junior person feels like they own a project, even if it's small, they will be
more motivated to get it right.

### Planning

Many teams follow the Agile methodology which involves a planning session for
every Sprint with the whole team present. This is the time where tasks are
assigned to the different team members and the first place where you might be
missing an opportunity to help somebody on the team.

Very often the industry demands high velocity and this might translate to
assign the difficult tasks to senior developers so they get done faster. The
other side of this coin is that the more junior developers might get more
trivial tasks. While that might be efficient in the short term, it doesn't help
the team evolve much and it will probably frustrate everybody.

It's important to realize where each team member stands at. Exclusively
assigning simple tasks to junior developers will not challenge nor push them
towards growing their skills. However, assigning them tasks that are too
difficult might frustrate them and push them away. Planning is the time to
think about the gap between where each teammate stands and where do you want
them to be. Ideally, every member would have a reasonable dose of a challenge
for every sprint.

### Daily stand

Continuing with the Agile methodology, daily stands are another common
practice. Many people fall into the dynamic of using their stand to just report
to their manager on their progress, without getting any corrections regarding
the amount of challenge they might be facing.

Stands are a great way to analyze the weaknesses and strengths of each team
member. It's also a great opportunity to give small adjustments to the tasks to
ensure that everybody is getting their fair share of personal growth. If a
person is having difficulties with a problem, it might be time to simplify the
task or pair with them to unblock them. On the other hand, if they're getting
bored it might be worth considering to ask for a few more details to have them
improve and learn something new.

This not only is good practice in traditional project management, but also a
tool for learning. Sometimes you can sacrifice a little bit of short-term
progress in order to invest in long-term skills.

### Code reviews

Hopefully, your team does code reviews and you all are aware of each other’s
strengths and weaknesses. There are a few common situations during code reviews
that are especially key to smooth the learning process for junior developers.
Some of them are:

* When they're having a very hard time, consider splitting up the task into
  multiple ones. You don't want them to be frustrated. You can focus on a
  different technical challenge at a time, ensuring that the takeaways are
  clearer.
* If they're not being challenged by the task, consider asking to
  include a small refactor, more tests or documentation. Create a habit where
  every task is an opportunity to improve the quality of your product.
* When you see some strange code, make it an opportunity to know your peer by
  asking. Don’t assume and tell them what to do, stay friendly and connect your
  thought processes. It might be a chance to share some experiences they hadn’t
  thought of.

### Pairing

Pairing is another tool to unblock a developer when they're struggling with a
particular problem. It’s also about two developers learning from each other, so
keeping each other's strengths and weaknesses in mind is key. You don’t want it
to become a session in which a senior developer is just telling a junior
developer what to do at every step. Neither would be gaining much.

Knowing how many “hints” to give is a skill that can also be refined over time.
In general, keep in mind the rule this talk started with and set them up for a
big success while allowing them to experiment and make small mistakes.

### Conclusion

Working on communication and knowing the people around you is a great start for
a well-functioning team. Continuously focusing on adding small challenges to
everybody's day is the next step to ensure that our teams grow constantly.
Applying this simple formula consistently over time is a scalable way to help
junior developers grow into senior ones that can continue applying these
techniques. You can all make a huge impact on other people and grow with and
within our precious industry while doing so.

## Pitch

Rails is now becoming a very mature framework, which makes it look like it has
built some solid abstractions that we can all confidently rely on. It's now
time to focus on the next layer of abstraction to optimize: the human layer.

Not all teams are the same, but most share a few aspects like diversity in
experiences. This generates a common pattern where people with more experience
will often have more people depending on them because of their skills. Sharing
those skills and experience effectively is key to a healthy team with equal
individuals that are happy and productive.

I have been on both sides of that coin in my recent experience: in about 4
years of professional experience, I've gone from being a recent graduate to
leading a team of juniors and seniors together. I've learned that ignoring the
differences between individuals is losing on a lot of value and that not being
proactive about the role that each person has on a team is also passing on a
lot of value.
