# Follow the Leader

## Abstract

You might have noticed that different technical leaders have different styles.
Some are strong-minded, some are empowering, some are great politicians, and
some are great people to be around. While it's impossible to be the perfect
leader for everyone, analyzing what works for others will help you become a
great one for your team. Follow them!

You don't need to be a manager to become a change agent. In this talk, you will
see multiple examples of leadership styles and learn what their strengths and
weaknesses are. After this, you will have the inspiration to become a unifying
voice in your team.

## Description

Leaders are measured by the impact they have on the people they lead. There are
two key factors in that equation: the leadership style and the team's style.
Knowing the people you want to influence is half the battle, but figuring out
the best way to empower them requires knowing what works for them.

For years, I've demanded a lot from my managers when there were things I didn't
like about the work or the team. I felt that as an individual contributor, my
role was to be told about requirements and code them, nothing else. Maybe
sometimes I didn't see technical debt being a priority, or maybe I became
frustrated because the team wouldn't use a code pattern I thought it was suited
for a project. About two years ago I became a manager because I wanted the
power to change some of those things. Interestingly enough, I realized the
tools to improve process were within reach all along!

Fortunately, there's a way to prepare for becoming a change agent: to study how
others do it! This talk will be a catalog of different ways leaders inspire and
an analysis of how they do it. By using stories from my own experience managing
and being managed, I'll illustrate what works and what doesn't for each
approach, depending on the motivations of the team. Do people around you get
excited about new technologies? Would they prefer shipping more features? Do
you know if they enjoy pairing all day or maybe they rather have time alone?

We will go through all of these different personalities and many others in an
attempt to understand how to connect better with them. Our field is full of
situations that are perceived very differently depending on the receiver. Code
reviews, sprint planning sessions, architecture debates, calendar hygiene... We
will go through specific guidelines that you can apply right away to make sure
everybody on the team is on the same page. You too can become the change you
want to see in your team!

By the end of this session, you will have a mental framework to understand your
peers better and learn what motivates them. You will also know what sort of
processes are more likely to "click" with their personalities. Applying these
ideas will help you become a catalyst for their productivity and help them
succeed. Isn't that what being a leader is all about?

## Pitch

Leading is not something that needs to be done at a large scale. It also
doesn't need to be backed by a title. Anybody can become an inspiring figure
for the people around them and become a powerful asset to a team.

I have had many mentors over the years, some of which have made me give the
best of myself. There are also many people in the community I follow and listen
to carefully. About two years ago, I became a team leader of my own and I
realized that I never needed the title to start applying some of the things
I've learned from the people I admire. I hope I can help others how to do
exactly that.
