# Imperfect Humans Building Perfect Software

## Abstract

As developers, we strive to craft perfect code. However, we’re imperfect humans
that need to collaborate, and our teams are full of people with different views
on how to solve problems. Healthy teams use their diversity to find better
solutions while unhealthy ones burn out fighting.

In this talk, you’ll learn how to build teams that are happier, more
productive, and better equipped to handle conflict. I’ll draw from my own
experiences to teach how to better understand teams and adapt to their human
nature. I hope you can relate and use them to improve your own dynamics.

## Details

Through my few years of experience programming professionally, I’ve worked on
joyful teams, and I’ve also been in very displeasing situations that have made
me love my job less. As I’ve grown and seen different teams, I’ve also seen
that some of these situations are not unique and are wider problems in the
community.

In this talk I’ll walk through some of these problems. Some of them are very
practical and technical, like:

* How to pick between different implementations?
* How good is good enough? Should you push for smaller details or let them go?
* How to differentiate objective truths from opinions?
* When should you push strongly for your opinion, and how can you do so without
  being ‘aggressive’?

Other problems are more emotional and relate to group dynamics, like:

* How do you avoid burnout from working with the same group of people?
* How do you handle situations that force you to take shortcuts you disagree
  with?
* How can we stay in touch with our human side to smooth over contentious
  debates?
* How can you make your team dynamic inclusive for team members with different
  backgrounds?
* How can we acknowledge our imperfections to embrace criticism?

Both types of problems result in frustration in the short and long term.
Improving our skills to navigate these situations makes us happier and also
makes the team more prone to success.

While going through each of the items above, I’ll be narrating my experiences
and what I’ve learned from them. We’ll also discuss how to avoid falling common
pitfalls in collaboration by analyzing how others have dealt with similar
issues and by detailing specific approaches you can try to alleviate those
issues on your team.

The Ruby community makes a point to bake kindness into its identity and cares
deeply about the developer happiness. This talk makes a point to extend that
thinking to our teams.

## Pitch

The people in our community chose Ruby because they appreciate joy as one
important quality of our profession. Achieving joy doesn’t stop after
committing your code, it extends to the team interactions that build larger
projects.

The fact that RubyConf has a “Human Factors” track proves that we care. I
didn’t know how important that factor was until I had to deal with it. I think
it’s something very important that we don’t talk enough about, we’re expected
to just learn as we go. I think we can do better as a community and learn ways
of creating healthier human interactions when building software.
