# The Way of the Mentor

## Abstract

There are people that are such great teachers that they awaken a special
interest in what they teach.  When on a team, these people add immense value,
they become mentors.  Do you want to know what makes them so good?

Join me on this journey to become a mentor for your peers.  You'll learn how to
practice the key skill of empathy, so come prepared to be vulnerable today to
become stronger tomorrow!

## Description

This talk is meant to prepare you to become a technical leader in a way that
you can empower the people around you.  As such, it's mainly aimed towards
intermediate to advanced developers with substantial technical experience that
other people would benefit from.  Newcomers might also be able to learn about
pitfalls to be aware of going forward into their career.

They say the number of developers doubles every 5 years, which feels like an
astonishing rate.  On the other hand, it seems like the market for developers
is still very much hungry for talent.  With those two things combined, it seems
like we're going to be seeing a huge growth in our community in the next
decades.  Interestingly enough, growing a community is very much about humans
and not so much about the technology itself.

To continue with the dichotomy, a large amount of the newcomers to development
have very little experience but the industry keeps demanding solutions to more
complex problems.  This creates a big gap between novices that struggle with
the basics and seasoned developers that know whole codebases by heart.  In this
scenario, it can be emotionally hard to be a beginner and it's up to the
veterans to make their lives better.

While it's comfortable being an expert on a given field, with such a rapidly
changing industry, it's only a matter of time until we find ourselves being the
beginners on a different one.  In this talk, we're going to explore ways to
close the gap between those two extremes by becoming more empathetic teachers
through becoming more humble students.  The path towards becoming an effective
teacher (without coming up as arrogant) goes through embracing these lessons:

* Lesson #1: Do yourself a favor: Always keep learning.
* Lesson #2: Know what you don't know: Be humble so to become more empathetic.
* Lesson #3: Do the world a favor: Teach them what you know.

By the end of this talk, you will have a better idea of what kind of behaviors
are more prone to scare beginners and what others will make you become a mentor
for them.  Come ready to question some of your habits and it'll pay off!
